<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="calibre11">THE ANIMALS IN THE PIT</span></h2>
</div>
<p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" /> 
<span class="smallcaps">A Pig</span> was going to church at St. Petersburg, and the Wolf met him. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Piggy, Piggy, where are you faring?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"To St. Petersburg, to pray to God."
</p><p class="calibre6">"Take me with!" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Come along, Gossip." 
</p><p class="calibre6">So they went on together, and met the Vixen.
</p><p class="calibre6">"Pig, where are you going?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"To St. Petersburg, so please you." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Take me with!" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Come along, Gossip." 
</p><p class="calibre6">So they went on together and met the Hare, who said, "Piggy, Piggy, where are you going?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"On to St. Petersburg, to pray to God?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Very well, take me with." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Very well, Slant-eyes, I will." 
</p><p class="calibre6">Then they met the Squirrel, who also went with them. But on their road they came across a broad, deep pit. The Pig jumped and tumbled in, and after him the Wolf, the Fox, the Hare and the Squirrel. 
</p><p class="calibre6">And they sat there for a long time, and became very hungry, for they had nothing to eat. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Let's all begin singing," said the Vixen, "and we will eat the animal who has the thinnest voice." 
</p><p class="calibre6">So the Wolf struck in a deep gruff voice, Aw, aw, aw! And the Pig followed in a tone just a shade softer, Oo, oo, oo! But the Vixen came in fine and sharp, Eh, eh, eh; whilst the Hare trilled the thinnest Ee, ee, ee in the world. The Squirrel also sang Ee, ee, ee! So the <span><span id="calibre_link-364" data-page-number="120" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/136" data-page-index="136" data-page-quality="4" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/136"></span></span>animals at once set-to tearing up the Squirrel and Hare, and ate them down to their bones. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Next day the Vixen said: "We will eat the person with the fattest voice." That was the Wolf with his great gruff Aw, aw, aw! So they ate him up. The Vixen ate up the flesh and kept the heart and the bowels, And for three days she sat and ate them.
</p><p class="calibre6">And the Pig then asked her: "What are you eating?&mdash;give me some!" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Oh, Pig, I am eating my own flesh. You tear your belly up and munch it yourself." 
</p><p class="calibre6">So the Pig did, and the Vixen feasted on him. 
</p><p class="calibre6">The Vixen then was left as the last person in the pit. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Did she climb up, or is she there still? I don't know, really! 
</p>
</div>

<div class="licensecontainer" about="#mwt10">
<div class="calibre24"><div class="calibre25"><div class="calibre26"><div class="calibre27">
<p class="calibre6"><span><span typeof="mw:File"><span></span></span></span></p>
</div><div class="calibre28">
<div class="calibre29">
<p class="calibre6">This work was published before January 1, 1928, and is in the <b class="calibre30"><a rel="mw:WikiLink/Interwiki" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public%20domain" title="w:Public domain">public domain</a></b> worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="calibre31">
<p class="calibre6"><span></span></p>
</div></div></div></div>
<div class="calibre7">
<p class="calibre6"><span>Public domain</span><span>Public domain</span><span>false</span><span>false</span></p>
</div>
</div> 


<link rel="mw:PageProp/Language" href="https://ru.wikisource.org/wiki/Народные%20русские%20сказки%20(Афанасьев)/Звери%20в%20яме#29" class="calibre7" /></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en" id="calibre_link-141"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt9" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-365" data-page-number="121" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/137" data-page-index="137" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/137"></span></span><div class="wst-dhr3">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
