<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-70" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="calibre11">THE ENCHANTED TSARÉVICH</span></h2>
</div>
<p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" /> 
<span class="smallcaps">Once</span> upon a time there was a merchant who had three daughters: it so happened he had one day to go to strange countries to buy wares, and so he asked his daughters, "What shall I bring you from beyond the seas?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">The eldest asked for a new coat, and the next one also asked for a new coat; but the youngest one only took a sheet of paper and sketched a flower on it: "Bring me, <i class="calibre33">bátyushka</i>,<sup id="calibre_link-124" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-123" {http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops}type="noteref">[1]</a></sup>  a flower like this!" 
</p><p class="calibre6">So the merchant went and made a long journey to foreign kingdoms, but he could never see such a flower. So he came back home, and he saw on his way a splendid lofty palace with watch-towers, turrets, and a garden. He went a walk in the garden, and you cannot imagine how many trees he saw and flowers, every flower fairer than the other flowers. And then he looked and he saw a single one like the one which his daughter had sketched. "Oh," he said, "I will tear off and bring this to my beloved daughter: evidently there is nobody here to watch me." So he ran up and broke it off, and as soon as he had done it, in that very instant a boisterous wind arose and thunder thundered, and a fearful monster stood in front of him, a formless, winged snake with three heads. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"How dared you play the master in my garden!" cried the snake to the merchant. "Why have you broken off a blossom?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">The merchant was frightened, fell on his knees and besought pardon. 
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-528" data-page-number="284" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/300" data-page-index="300" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/300"></span></span>"Very well," said the snake, "I will forgive you, but on condition that whoever meets you first, when you reach home, you must give me for all eternity; and, if you deceive me, do not forget, nobody can ever hide himself from me: I shall find you wherever you are." 
</p><p class="calibre6">The merchant agreed to the condition and came back home. 
</p><p class="calibre6">And the youngest daughter saw him from the window and ran out to meet him. Then the merchant hung his head, looked at his beloved daughter, and began to shed bitter tears. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"What is the matter with you? why are you weeping, <i class="calibre33">bátyushka</i>?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">He gave her the blossom and told what had befallen him. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Do not grieve, <i class="calibre33">bátyushka</i>" said the youngest daughter, "it is God's gift: perhaps I shall fare well. Take me to the snake." 
</p><p class="calibre6">So the father took her away, set her in the palace, bade farewell, and set out home. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Then the fair maiden, the daughter of the merchant, went in the different rooms, and beheld everywhere gold and velvet; but no one was there to be seen, not a single human soul. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Time went by and went by, and the fair damsel became hungry and thought, "Oh, if I could only have something to eat!" But before ever she had thought, in front of her stood a table, and on the table were dishes and drinks and refreshments: the only thing that was not there was birds' milk. Then she sat down to the table, drank and ate, got up, and it had all vanished. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Darkness now came on, and the merchant's daughter went into the bedroom, wishing to lie down and sleep. Then a boisterous wind rustled round and the three-headed snake appeared in front of her. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Hail, fair maiden! put my bed outside this door!" 
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-529" data-page-number="285" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/301" data-page-index="301" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/301"></span></span>So the fair maiden put the bed outside the door and herself lay on the bedstead. 
</p><p class="calibre6">She awoke in the morning, and again in the entire house there was not a single soul to be seen. And it all went well with her: whatever she wished for appeared on the spot. 
</p><p class="calibre6">In the evening the snake flew to her and ordered, "Now, fair maiden, put my bed next to your bedstead." 
</p><p class="calibre6">She then laid it next to her bedstead, and the night went by, and the maiden awoke, and again there was never a soul in the palace. 
</p><p class="calibre6">And for the third time the snake came in the evening and said, "Now, fair maiden, I am going to lie with you in the bedstead." 
</p><p class="calibre6">The merchant's daughter was fearfully afraid of lying on a single bed with such a formless monster. But she could not help herself, so she strengthened her heart and lay down with him. 
</p><p class="calibre6">In the morning the serpent said to her, "If you are now weary, fair maiden, go to your father and your sisters: spend a day with them, and in the evening come back to me. But see to it that you are not late. If you are one single minute late I shall die of grief." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"No, I shall not be late," said the maiden, the merchant's daughter, and descended the steps; there was a barouche ready for her, and she sat down. That very instant she arrived at her father's courtyard. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Then the father saw, welcomed, kissed her, and asked her, "How has God been dealing with you, my beloved daughter? Has it been well with you?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Very well, father!" And she started telling of all the wealth there was in the palace, how the snake loved her, how whatever she only thought of was in that instant fulfilled. 
</p><p class="calibre6">The sisters heard, and did not know what to do out of sheer envy. 
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-530" data-page-number="286" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/302" data-page-index="302" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/302"></span></span>Now the day was ebbing away, and the fair maiden made ready to go back, and was bidding farewell to her father and her sisters, saying, "This is the time I must go back: I was bidden keep to my term."
</p><p class="calibre6">But the envious sisters rubbed onions on their eyes and made as though they were weeping: "Do not go away, sister; stay until to-morrow." 
</p><p class="calibre6">She was very sorry for her sisters, and stayed one day more. 
</p><p class="calibre6">In the morning she bade farewell to them all and went to the palace. When she arrived it was as empty as before. She went into the garden, and she saw the serpent lying dead in the pond! He had thrown himself for sheer grief into the water. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Oh, my God, what have I done!" cried out the fair maiden, and she wept bitter tears, ran up to the pond, hauled the snake out of the water, embraced one head and kissed it with all her might. And the snake trembled, and in a minute turned into a good youth. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"I thank you, fair maiden," he said. "You have saved me from the greatest misfortune. I am no snake, but an enchanted Prince." 
</p><p class="calibre6">Then they went back to the merchant's house, were betrothed, lived long, and lived for good and happy things. 
</p>
</div><span about="#mwt9">
</span><ol class="references" about="#mwt9">
<li id="calibre_link-123" {http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops}type="footnote" class="calibre37"><span><a href="#calibre_link-124">↑</a></span> <span>Father.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<div class="licensecontainer" about="#mwt10">
<div class="calibre24"><div class="calibre25"><div class="calibre26"><div class="calibre27">
<p class="calibre6"><span><span typeof="mw:File"><span></span></span></span></p>
</div><div class="calibre28">
<div class="calibre29">
<p class="calibre6">This work was published before January 1, 1928, and is in the <b class="calibre30"><a rel="mw:WikiLink/Interwiki" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public%20domain" title="w:Public domain">public domain</a></b> worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="calibre31">
<p class="calibre6"><span></span></p>
</div></div></div></div>
<div class="calibre7">
<p class="calibre6"><span>Public domain</span><span>Public domain</span><span>false</span><span>false</span></p>
</div>
</div> 


<link rel="mw:PageProp/Language" href="https://ru.wikisource.org/wiki/Народные%20русские%20сказки%20(Афанасьев)/Заклятый%20царевич" class="calibre7" /></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en" id="calibre_link-101"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt9" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-531" data-page-number="287" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/303" data-page-index="303" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/303"></span></span><div class="wst-dhr3">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
