<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXXXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-83" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="smallcaps">The Crystal Apple and the Silver Saucer</span></h2>
</div>
<p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" /> 
There is a strong Celtic flavour about this episode. Cf. The Twa Sisters o' Binnorie. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
</p>
<div class="wst-block-center">
<div class="poem">
<p class="calibre40">Ho's ta'en three locks o' her yellow hair <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>(Binnorie, oh Binnorie), <br class="calibre3" />
And wi' them strung his harp sae rare <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>By the bonny mill-dams of Binnorie. <br class="calibre3" />
<br class="calibre3" />
<br class="calibre3" />
And sune the harp sang loud and clear <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>(Binnorie, oh Binnorie), <br class="calibre3" />
Fareweel my father, and mother dear! <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>By the bonny mill-dams of Binnorie.<br class="calibre3" />
<br class="calibre3" />
&nbsp;<br class="calibre3" />
And then, as plain as plain could be, <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>(Binnorie, oh Binnorie), <br class="calibre3" />
There sits my sister wha drowned me! <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>By the bonny mill-dams o' Binnorie.
</p>
</div>
</div>
<p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
In this story the Russian of the words sung by the piper is also in Russian ballad metre. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Danílo the Unfortunate.</i> This is a prose version of a ballad and contains a very full account of this legend. The old hag whom Danílo  meets on the way is elsewhere called the Wise Woman of Kíev, an old witch with the ugly qualities generally assigned. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Death.</i> Death is feminine in Russian and occurs all through the folk-lore as the visible figure of a skeleton whom they met by the way on the roadsides, and who may be cheated of her prey or dealt with like any other demon. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Dobrýnya Nikítich.</i> One of the great figures at the legendary court of Prince Vladímir. He was a dragon-slayer, but his principal employment was as ambassador. 
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-582" data-page-number="338" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/354" data-page-index="354" data-page-quality="4" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/354"></span></span><br class="calibre3" />
</p>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
