<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-57" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="calibre11">ELIJAH THE PROPHET AND ST. NICHOLAS</span></h2>
</div>
<p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" /> 
<span class="smallcaps">Once</span>, a long time ago, there lived a peasant. He always observed St. Nicholas' day, but never, never, that of St. Elias; he even worked on it. He used to say a <i class="calibre33">Te Deum</i> to Nicholas, and burn a taper, but never gave as much as a thought to the Prophet Elijah. 
</p><p class="calibre6">One day Elijah and Nicholas were walking through this peasant's fields, going along and surveying; and the ears were so large, so full, that it warmed one's heart to look at them!
</p><p class="calibre6">"What a fine crop this will be!" said Nicholas. "Yes, and he's a fine fellow, a good, brave peasant, pious; he remembers God, and reveres the Holy Saints. Whatever he turns his hand to shall prosper." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Ha, let's have a look, brother," Elijah demurred. "Will there be so much over? My lightnings shall glint and my hail beat his field down; then your peasant shall learn right, and regard my name-day." 
</p><p class="calibre6">So they wrangled and argued, and at last agreed to go each his own way. 
</p><p class="calibre6">St. Nicholas at once went off to the peasant, and said: "Go and sell the Father by St. Elias' all your standing corn: not a blade will be left; it will be destroyed by hail." 
</p><p class="calibre6">Up the peasant dashed to the pope: "Oh, <i class="calibre33">bátyushka</i>, won't you buy all my standing corn? I'll sell you my whole field; I am so short of money; take it and give it me. Do buy it, Father; I'll sell it cheap." 
</p><p class="calibre6">They haggled and bargained, and at last agreed. The peasant took his cash and went home. 
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-461" data-page-number="217" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/233" data-page-index="233" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/233"></span></span>Time went by&mdash;not much, nor little; a heavy thundrous cloud gathered, and, with frightsome lightning and hail, played on the peasant's field, cut through his crops like a scythe, and left not one blade to tell the tale. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Next day, Elijah and Nicholas were faring through, and Elijah said: "Look how I've blasted the peasant's field!" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"The peasant's field? No, my brother, no; you've done your work thoroughly; but it belongs to the pope by St. Elias, not to the peasant." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"What! That pope?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Oh, yes; about a week ago the peasant sold the field to the pope, and got hard cash for it! And the pope is crying over the spilt money." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"That won't do," said Elijah; "I will grow the meadow anew&mdash;'twill be as good as it was." 
</p><p class="calibre6">They had their talk out and went on their way. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Up went St. Nicholas to the peasant once again. "Go and see the pope," he said, "and redeem your field; you won't lose by it." 
</p><p class="calibre6">The peasant went to see the pope. "The Lord has grievously afflicted you, has smitten your field with hail, as smooth as a board. Let's share the cost of it; I will take back my field, and to relieve your loss will return you half the money." 
</p><p class="calibre6">Oh, how glad the pope was to consent! They shook hands on it at once. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Meanwhile, somehow or other, the peasant's field righted itself; new shoots sprang up out of the old roots, the rain poured down on them, and nourished the earth; wonderful fresh corn grew up, lofty and thick; not a weed to be seen; and the ears were so full that they bowed down to earth. The little sun warmed them, and the rye was warmed through, and waved like a field of gold. The peasant bound up sheaf after sheaf, built rick after rick; carted it away and stacked it. 
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-462" data-page-number="218" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/234" data-page-index="234" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/234"></span></span>Just then Elijah and St. Nicholas were once more passing by. Elijah looked blithely at the field and said: "Just look, Nicholas, what a blessing I have wrought! This is my reward to the pope, and he'll never forget it all his life." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"The pope! No, brother; it is a great boon, but then this is the peasant's field; the pope hasn't a rod of it!" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Wha-at?"
</p><p class="calibre6">"It is true. After the meadow had been battered by hail, the peasant went up to the pope and bought it back at half price." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Stop a bit," said the Prophet Elijah, "I'll take all the good out of it; out of all the peasant's ricks he shall not thresh more than six gallons at a time." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Here, this looks bad," thought St. Nicholas, and instantly went to see the peasant, and said: "See to it; when you start threshing, never take more than a sheaf at a time on the threshing-floor." 
</p><p class="calibre6">So the peasant set to threshing, and he got six gallons out of every sheaf; all his granaries and lofts were full up with rye, and still there was much left over; he built new storehouses, and filled them full to the flush. 
</p><p class="calibre6">But one day Elijah the Prophet and St. Nicholas were passing by his courtyard, and Elijah glanced up and said: "Why has he built these new granaries? How can he stock them all?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"They're full up," St. Nicholas replied. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"How did he get so much grain?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Oho! Every sheaf yielded him six gallons, and, as soon as he started threshing, he brought them in sheaf by sheaf." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Oh, my brother Nicholas!" Elijah guessed: "you must have told him what to do!" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Well, I thought it all out, and was going to say . . ."
</p><p class="calibre6">"What are you after? It's all your work. Never mind; your peasant shall still have a reminder of me." 
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-463" data-page-number="219" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/235" data-page-index="235" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/235"></span></span>"What will you do?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"I shall not tell you this time!" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Well, if evil is to be, it will come."
</p><p class="calibre6">Nicholas thought, and again went to the peasant, told him to buy two tapers, one big and one small, and gave him instructions. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Next day Elijah the Prophet and St. Nicholas were out together in the guise of wanderers, and the peasant happened to meet them, carrying two waxen candles-one big one that cost a rouble, and a little one that cost a copek. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Where are you going to, peasant?" St. Nicholas said. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Oh, I am going to light the rouble taper to the Prophet Elijah; he has been so charitable to me. My field was ravaged by hail, so he intervened, <i class="calibre33">bátyushka</i>, and gave me a crop twice as good." 
</p><p class="calibre6">"For whom is the farthing dip?" 
</p><p class="calibre6">"Oh, for St. Nicholas!" the peasant said, and pursued his way. 
</p><p class="calibre6">"There you are, Elijah," said St. Nicholas: "you said I gave everything away to the peasant; now you see what the truth is." 
</p><p class="calibre6">And with this the dispute was ended: Elijah the Prophet was reconciled, and ceased persecuting the peasant with hail-storms, so that he lived a merry life from that day and honoured both name-days equally. 
</p>
</div>

<div class="licensecontainer" about="#mwt10">
<div class="calibre24"><div class="calibre25"><div class="calibre26"><div class="calibre27">
<p class="calibre6"><span><span typeof="mw:File"><span></span></span></span></p>
</div><div class="calibre28">
<div class="calibre29">
<p class="calibre6">This work was published before January 1, 1928, and is in the <b class="calibre30"><a rel="mw:WikiLink/Interwiki" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public%20domain" title="w:Public domain">public domain</a></b> worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="calibre31">
<p class="calibre6"><span></span></p>
</div></div></div></div>
<div class="calibre7">
<p class="calibre6"><span>Public domain</span><span>Public domain</span><span>false</span><span>false</span></p>
</div>
</div> 


<link rel="mw:PageProp/Language" href="https://ru.wikisource.org/wiki/Илья-пророк%20и%20Никола%20(Афанасьев)/1914%20(ДО)" class="calibre7" /></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en" id="calibre_link-190"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt9" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en">
<span><span id="calibre_link-464" data-page-number="220" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/236" data-page-index="236" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/236"></span></span><div class="wst-dhr3">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
