<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-55" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="calibre11">THE FEAST OF THE DEAD</span></h2>
</div>
<p><br class="calibre3" /> 
Some girls were out at night for the evening, and arranged for an evening party. They went out to get <i>vódka</i>. There were bones lying on the road. "Ho!" they said, "bones, bones, come and be our guests: we are having an evening party."</p><p>So they went back home, brought the <i>vódka</i>, and stepped in over the threshold.</p>
<p>But the bones came and sat at the table just like men, and said to the maidens, "Now give us the brandy."</p><p>So the girls gave them brandy.</p>
<p>"Give us bread!"</p>
<p>So they gave them bread.</p>
<p>They all sat down to eat, and one maiden dropped the meat.</p><p>Then the bones began lifting and stretching their legs under the bench. The girls tried to run away; and the bones raced after them. The bones caught one girl up, and broke her across their knees. The other girls made their escape into the loft; one girl hid behind the water-butt.</p><p>The bones ran up to the loft and asked: "What is there up there?"</p>
<p>"God's taper."</p>
<p>"But down there?"</p>
<p>"The Devil's poker," she answered.</p>
<p>So the bones hauled the second girl out and strangled her.</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p></p>
</div>

<div class="licensecontainer" about="#mwt10">
<div class="calibre24"><div class="calibre25"><div class="calibre26"><div class="calibre27">
<p></span></p>
</div><div class="calibre28">
<div class="calibre29">
<p>This work was published before January 1, 1928, and is in the <b class="calibre30"><a rel="mw:WikiLink/Interwiki" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public%20domain" title="w:Public domain">public domain</a></b> worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.</p>
<div class="calibre31">
<p><span></span></p>
</div></div></div></div>
<div class="calibre7">
<p><span>Public domain</span><span>Public domain</span><span>false</span><span>false</span></p>
 
</section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en" id="calibre_link-189"><section data-mw-section-id="0">

<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt9" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en">
<div class="wst-dhr3">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
