<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-82" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="calibre11">NOTES</span></h2>
</div>
<p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" /> 
<i class="calibre33">Alyósha Popóvich.</i> One of the great knights at the court of Prince Vladímir. He was an effeminate kind of person and perhaps one who rather incited others to effort by his jibes than by his prowess. He is always given the uncomplimentary <i class="calibre33">soubriquet</i> of the 'Mocker of Women.' His principal heroic episode is told in the prose ballad in this book entitled 'Alyósha Popóvich.' 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Angey</i>, Tsar. Filuyán is a fabulous city found in the cantations and mystical rites of the Russian peasants. It is, however, probably derived from the Greek θύλη. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baba_Yaga" title="w:Baba Yaga"><i class="calibre33">Bába Yagá</i></a>. In Professor Sypherd's studies on Chaucer's <a href="https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_House_of_Fame" title="The House of Fame"><i class="calibre33">House of Fame</i></a>, Chaucer Society, 1904, a most valuable note will be found on revolving houses. It will be seen that the legend is cognate with magic wheels that revolve at great speed, or turn on wheels emitting flame and poison. The nearest analogy quoted is the whirling rampart in the <i class="calibre33">Mael Duinn</i>, but the Russian legend is evidently related and not derived. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bogatyr" title="w:Bogatyr"><i class="calibre33">Bogatýr</i></a>. The <i class="calibre33">bogatýr</i> is the Russian Knight, but is absolutely unlike any Western romantic notion. He is a person of magical power and gigantic stature and prowess. Some of the <i class="calibre33">bogatyrí</i> are decidedly demi-gods; others more decisively human; but they all have some superhuman, it may be said inhuman, touch. The derivation of the word has been very much in dispute. The characteristic thing to note is that the word is only found in Russian, and in no other Slavonic language, and is almost certainly of Tatar origin, the original form being something like <i class="calibre33">Bagadur</i>. The Sanskrit derivation which is attempted of <i class="calibre33">Baghadhara</i> seems scarcely probable. Goryáyev's dictionary states that the original meaning was a company-commander-of the Tatars. <span><span id="calibre_link-580" data-page-number="336" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/352" data-page-index="352" data-page-quality="4" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/352"></span></span>If so, <i class="calibre33">bogatýr</i> is probably a corruption (though <i class="calibre33">bog</i> God and <i class="calibre33">bogat</i> rich) of the form <i class="calibre33">buĭtur</i>, found in the Slóvo, which is certainly cognate with the Turanian root <i class="calibre33">buǐ</i>, to command, <i class="calibre33">v.</i> notes in my edition of Igor. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bryansk" title="w:Bryansk"><i class="calibre33">Bryánsk</i></a>. Bryánsk in the Province of Orël contains wonderful woods which were in ancient times impenetrable, and became the legendary home of magic, and of weird happenings. The Aspen tree is always associated in Russian folk-lore with magic and wizardry; it is also said that Judas hanged himself on this tree. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chernihiv" title="w:Chernihiv"><i class="calibre33">Chernígov</i></a>. An ancient city of Russia on the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dnieper" title="w:Dnieper">Dniepr</a>, a little higher up than Kíev. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Christ.</i> As, in German folk-lore, the legends of Christ walking the earth with His disciples are very frequent and characteristic. There is a touch of friendly familiarity in this presentation which does not involve the least irreverence, but adds a touch of sarcastic humour which the Germans lack. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">The Brother of Christ.</i> For the punishment of the old man who grumbled at the good things of earth there is a surprisingly close analogy in Dante's <a href="https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Divine_Comedy/Inferno" title="The Divine Comedy/Inferno"><i class="calibre33">Inferno</i></a>, canto vii. 
</p>
<div class="wst-block-center">
<div class="poem">
<p class="calibre40"><span class="wst-fqm">"</span>Fitti nel limo dicon; Tristi fummo <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>Nell' aer dolce che dal sol s'allegra, <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>Portando dentro accidioso fummo: <br class="calibre3" />
Or c' attristiam nella belletta negra."<br class="calibre3" />
<br class="calibre3" />
<br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-fqm">"</span>Sunk in the slime they utter: 'Loth were we, <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>In sweet air sullen, which the sun makes glad, <br class="calibre3" />
<span class="wst-gap">⁠</span>Our souls besmirched with dull reluctancy: <br class="calibre3" />
Now in this black morass, our hearts are sad.'"
</p>
</div>
</div> 
<p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Chufil-Filyushka.</i> Both these names are adaptations of the Greek θεόΦλος.
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-581" data-page-number="337" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/353" data-page-index="353" data-page-quality="4" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/353"></span></span>
</p>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
