<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="calibre11">ILYÁ MÚROMETS</span> <sup id="calibre_link-18" class="reference"><a href="#calibre_link-17" {http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops}type="noteref">[1]</a></sup> <span class="calibre11">AND SVYATOGÓR THE KNIGHT</span></h2>
</div>
<p><br class="calibre3" /> 
From the famous city of Múrom, out of the village of Karachárovo, the valiant, doughty youth Ilyá Múromets, the son of Iván, set out far into the open fields. The valiant champion met on his way the mighty knight Svyatogór; and the good youth was afraid of him; the old Cossack,  Ilyá Múromets, was afraid of Svyatogór the knight. So he set his horse to browse and himself mounted a thick grey oak to avoid Svyatogór the knight. Svyatogór the knight arrived under that same stout oak, put up his white linen tent, and took his wife out of his pocket. She spread out the chequered table-cloths and put sugary food and honeyed drink for him to eat. Svyatogór ate until he was sated, and drank until he was satisfied, and lay down to repose.</p>
<p>Then the wife of the knight observed Ilyá up in the grey oak, and spoke to him in this wise: "Hail, valiant and brave youth; climb down from the grey oak. If you do not climb down from the grey oak, you will arouse Svyatogór the knight, and he will give you to a speedy death."</p>
<p>So  Ilyá Múromets was afraid of Svyatogór, and slid down from the grey oak.</p>
<p>And again she spoke in this wise: "Come and do fornication with me, good youth. If you do not, I will arouse Svyatogór the knight, and he will give you to a speedy death."</p>
<p>So he did as he was bidden and went with her into the pocket of Svyatogór. Svyatogór arose from a sound sleep, saddled his horse, and went to the Holy Mountains. Then his horse began to sink fast into the earth, until the knight dug his spurs into his horse's fat haunches.</p>
<p>Then the horse spoke with a human voice: "I have carried you Svyatogór the knight and your young wife, but I cannot carry two knights and your young wife as well."</p>
<p>So then Svyatogór put his hand into the depths of his pocket, took his young wife out, and discovered Ilyá Múromets.</p>
<p>"How did you get into the depths of my pocket?"</p>
<p>"Your young wife forced me in there; she threatened my life." And Ilyá Múromets told Svyatogór the knight how he had fallen into the depths of the pocket.</p>
<p>So Svyatogór took his young wife, cut off her unruly head, broke up her white body into four parts, and scattered them on the bare fields.</p>
<p>Then Ilyá and Svyatogór made themselves sworn brothers, and they set out to the Holy Mountains. They came to a deep tomb, and the tomb was decked with red-gold. Svyatogór the knight lay down in that tomb as if it had been built for him.</p>
<p>"Cover me over with boards, my sworn brother," he said. And, as Ilyá covered him over with boards, the boards by Divine grace grew as they were required. "Uncover me, my sworn brother!"</p>
<p>But Ilyá Múromets had not the strength to uncover him; so he began to break the boards with his sword, and wherever he brandished his sword, hoops arose in his way.</p>
<p>"Take my sword, my sworn brother!"</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p> And Ilyá took the sword, but had not the strength to lift it up.</p>
<p>"Come, my sworn brother, I will give you strength."</p>
<p>Ilyá then went into the pit and Svyatogór breathed on him with his knightly breath. Then Ilyá took that sword, and wherever he made a stroke, iron hoops arose around.</p>
<p>"Come to me a second time, my sworn brother; I will give you more strength."</p>
<p>Ilyá Múromets said at once: "If I come down to you again, then our mother the grey earth will not be able to bear it: I have enough strength."</p>
<p>But Svyatogór  answered: "If you had come down again I should have breathed on you with a fatal breath, and you would have lain down to sleep beside me."</p>
<p>So there Svyatogór the knight remains to this day.</p>
</div><span about="#mwt9">
</span><ol class="references" about="#mwt9">
<li id="calibre_link-17" {http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops}type="footnote" class="calibre37"><span><a href="#calibre_link-18">↑</a></span> <span> Ilyá Múromets is one of the heroes of the <i>Byliny</i>: his great feat is the slaying of the Nightingale Robber. This tale may be eponymous of geography; Svyatogór (<i>Svyáty Góry</i>, Sacred Mountains) Múrom is on the river Oka, in the Province of Vladímir, one of the oldest cities in Russia; the village of Karachárovo is not far off.</span>
</li>
</ol>

<div class="licensecontainer" about="#mwt10">
<div class="calibre24"><div class="calibre25"><div class="calibre26"><div class="calibre27">
<p></span></p>
</div><div class="calibre28">
<div class="calibre29">
<p>This work was published before January 1, 1928, and is in the <b class="calibre30"><a rel="mw:WikiLink/Interwiki" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public%20domain" title="w:Public domain">public domain</a></b> worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.</p>
<div class="calibre31">
<p><span></span></p>
</div></div></div></div>
<div class="calibre7">
<p><span>Public domain</span><span>Public domain</span><span>false</span><span>false</span></p>
 
</section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en" id="calibre_link-21"><section data-mw-section-id="0">


<div class="calibre3" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt10" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en">
<div class="wst-dhr3">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
