<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-86" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="calibre11">GLOSSARY</span></h2>
</div>
<p><br class="calibre3" /> 
<i>Aspen</i>. Always associated with magic. Its trembling leaves give it a weird appearance.</p>
<p><i>Bába Yagá</i>. Russian witch, also Yagá Búra.</p>
<p><i>Bábushka</i>. The grandmother.</p>
<p><i>Bárkhat</i>. This word also means velvet.</p><p><i>Bátyushka</i>. Father in a general sense, meaning anybody older. <i>Otéts</i> is father, meaning the relationship of father and son.</p>
<p><i>Birds' milk</i>. The Russian folk-tale expression for asking for the moon.</p>
<p><i>Boyárs</i>. This may be translated earls, but in the Russian social scale it only meant the bigger men, the seigneurs.</p>
<p><i>Boyárynyi</i>. Countesses, feminine plural of <i>boyár</i>.</p>
<p><i>Chúdo-Yúda</i>. The Old Man of the Sea. This is a very clear loan from the Homeric Proteus.</p>
<p><i>Dyádka</i>. Uncle. A term of respect.</p>
<p><i>Egórushko Zalyót</i>. Means George the Bold Flier.</p>
<p><i>Fatá</i>. A long silken glove.</p>
<p><i>Gúsli</i>. A musical instrument, something like a zither with seven strings.</p>
<p><i>Iváshko Zapéchnik</i>. Iván, who is always sitting behind the stove.</p><p><i>Iváshechko</i>. A diminutive form of Iván.</p>
<p><i>Iváshko</i>. A diminutive form of Iván.</p>
<p><i>Izbá</i>. Hut.</p>
<p><i>Kaftán</i>. A peasant's overcoat, made very long.</p>
<p>Khvalýnsk. The old name of the Caspian. <i>Vide</i> Vazáza and Vólga.</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p> <i>Korolévich.</i> King's son. Koról, king.</p>
<p><i>Korolévna.</i> King's wife.</p>
<p><i>Ksálavy.</i> Mythical birds, the meaning of which is entirely unknown.</p>
<p><i>Mikháilo Ivánovich.</i> The popular name for the bear.</p>
<p><i>Mísha Kosolápy.</i> Dmítri, the Bandylegged.</p>
<p><i>Morévna.</i> Of the sea.</p>
<p><i>Nikíta.</i> From the Greek Νικήτης, conquer.</p>
<p><i>Pope.</i> Village priest.</p>
<p><i>Pud.</i> A Russian weight. Thirty-six pounds avoirdupois.</p>
<p><i>Sarafán</i>. A short sleeveless jacket, generally embroidered, worn over the bodice or the blouse.</p>
<p><i>Sazhén.</i> A length of seven feet.</p>
<p><i>Sebézh.</i> A city in the Vítebsk province, bordering on Poland. The Poles and the Mussulmen are all called infidels, Saracens or <i>Busormany</i>.</p>
<p><i>Shúba.</i> A fur mantle.</p>
<p><i>Stárosta.</i> Mayor of a town.</p>
<p><i>Teléga.</i> A peasant's cart without springs.</p>
<p><i>Tsarévich.</i> Tsar's son.</p>
<p><i>Tyátya.</i> Daddy.</p>
<p><i><span title="[sic]" class="calibre42">Tzarévna</span>.</i> Tsar's wife.</p>
<p><i>Ukaz.</i> Imperial edict.</p><p><i>Ványa.</i> A diminutive form of Iván.</p>
<p><i>Vertodúb.</i> The oak-turner, a gigantic figure.</p>
<p><i>Vertogór.</i> The mountain-turner; a gigantic figure.</p>
<p><i>Vóron Vóronovich.</i> Crow Crowson.</p>
<i>Zamorýshek.</i> This name is freely translated Benjamin, the last-born son of an old man. <div class="wst-dhr1">&nbsp;</div>
<div class="wst-center">
<div class="wst-size-block1">
<p class="calibre8">PRINTED BY<br class="calibre3" /> 
WM. BRENDON AND SON, LTD. PLYMOUTH, ENGLAND</p>
 
<div class="wst-dhr1">&nbsp;</div> 
</div></section></div>

<div class="mw-content-ltr" dir="ltr" {http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace}lang="en" id="calibre_link-147"><section data-mw-section-id="0"><p><span class="pagebreak" about="#mwt1" typeof="mw:Transclusion"></span></p>
 </section><section data-mw-section-id="-1"><h1 id="calibre_link-595" class="calibre43">About this digital edition</h1>

<p>This e-book comes from the online library <a rel="mw:WikiLink" href="https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Main_Page" title="Main Page">Wikisource</a><sup about="#mwt4" class="reference" id="calibre_link-152" rel="dc:references" typeof="mw:Extension/ref"><a href="#calibre_link-148" class="calibre44"><span>[1]</span></a></sup>. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...</p>

<p>We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the <a rel="mw:ExtLink nofollow" href="https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0">Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported</a><sup about="#mwt8" class="reference" id="calibre_link-153" rel="dc:references" typeof="mw:Extension/ref"><a href="#calibre_link-149" class="calibre45"><span>[2]</span></a></sup> license or, at your choice, those of the <a rel="mw:ExtLink nofollow" href="https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html">GNU FDL</a><sup about="#mwt10" class="reference" id="calibre_link-154" rel="dc:references" typeof="mw:Extension/ref"><a href="#calibre_link-150" class="calibre46"><span>[3]</span></a></sup>.</p>

<p>Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at <a rel="mw:WikiLink" href="https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Wikisource:Scriptorium" title="Wikisource:Scriptorium">this page</a><sup about="#mwt13" class="reference" id="calibre_link-155" rel="dc:references" typeof="mw:Extension/ref"><a href="#calibre_link-151" class="calibre47"><span>[4]</span></a></sup>.</p>

<p>The following users contributed to this book:</p>
<div id="calibre_link-596" class="calibre3">[The list of contributors has been omitted as requested.]
</div>

<hr class="calibre32" />
<ol class="references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt15"><li about="#cite_note-1" id="calibre_link-148" class="calibre37"><a href="#calibre_link-152" rel="mw:referencedBy"><span>↑ </span></a> <span>https://en.wikisource.org</span></li><li about="#cite_note-2" id="calibre_link-149" class="calibre37"><a href="#calibre_link-153" rel="mw:referencedBy"><span>↑ </span></a> <span>https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0</span></li><li about="#cite_note-3" id="calibre_link-150" class="calibre37"><a href="#calibre_link-154" rel="mw:referencedBy"><span>↑ </span></a> <span>https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html</span></li><li about="#cite_note-4" id="calibre_link-151" class="calibre37"><a href="#calibre_link-155" rel="mw:referencedBy"><span>↑ </span></a> <span>https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Wikisource:Scriptorium</span></li></ol></section></div>

</body></html>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
