<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-84" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><span class="smallcaps">The Dream. Notes</span></h2>
</div>
<p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" /> 
The <i class="calibre33">izbá</i>, or hut, always has a <i class="calibre33">dvor</i> or courtyard, access to which is gained through double gates as well as through a postern. Often the hut is raised by a flight of steps from the level of the courtyard. 
</p><p class="calibre6">The  <i class="calibre33">izbá</i> may have a cooling room in which to rest, so as to avoid the sudden change of air from the heated inner room; it is also a living room in the summer. Outside the <i class="calibre33">dvor</i> against the fence there is a bench (<i class="calibre33">lávka</i>), on which the family sits in the summer. The hut is made of logs, the fence of boards. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Between the rafters and the sloped roof is the loft (<i class="calibre33">cherdák</i>), into which a ladder leads. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Inside the hut is that essential and central feature of Russian peasant life, the stove, which occupies one side of a wall. In front against it three long implements stand, the poker, broom and shovel. The oven rests on a brick or tile foundation, about eighteen inches high, with a semicircular hollow space below. The top of the stove is used for a sleeping bench (<i class="calibre33">poláty</i>) for the old folk or the honoured guest. In larger houses there may be a <i class="calibre33">lezhán'ka</i> or heating stove, used as a sleeping sofa. 
</p><p class="calibre6">The bath-house is separate from the hut, and contains a flight of steps for different degrees of heat, obtained from white-hot stones on which water is flung. This is only found in better-class houses. In villages there is a general bath-house to which the peasants go once a week. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Every corner in the <i class="calibre33">izbá</i> has its particular name. There is the <i class="calibre33">great corner</i>, where the Ikon stands, the <i class="calibre33">upper corner</i> near the door, and the <i class="calibre33">stove corner</i> opposite to the doors of the stove. 
</p><p class="calibre6">The fence is made of boards or sticks or stumps. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Long thin laths are stuck on to an iron spike, and lit; a pail of water is placed below into which the cinders fall; these lamps must be renewed as they burn down, and the charred ends swept up. 
</p><p class="calibre6">Up to very recent times, patriarchal usages obtained through Russia, and married sons resided in the father's house. 
</p><p class="calibre6">This particular story portrays some of the personifications and allegorizings of the common acts of life; all of which have their appropriate blessing or grace. There are a number of tales of <span><span id="calibre_link-583" data-page-number="339" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/355" data-page-index="355" data-page-quality="4" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/355"></span></span>the curse attendant on the neglect of these duties, e.g. <i class="calibre33">The Devil in the Dough-pan</i>. 
</p><p class="calibre6">An example of the invocations is given in a note to <i class="calibre33">The Midnight Dance</i>. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Duke.</i> i.e. a translation of <i class="calibre33">voyevodá</i>, which is again a translation of the High-German <i class="calibre33">Herzog</i>, which again is derived from the Latin <i class="calibre33">Dux</i>, meaning the leader of an army, not a mere title. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Egóri Khrábry.</i> Egori the Brave. Is the Russian counterpart for St. George the Dragon-slayer. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Elijah the Prophet and St. Nicholas.</i> Perún was the God of Thunder in pagan Slavdom, and his attributes have been transferred to Elijah who is represented as driven up to Heaven in a fiery chariot darting fiery rays, drawn by four winged horses, and surrounded by clouds and flames; a tale which copied the biblical account of Elijah's end. On earth the noise of the wheels is called thunder. In Nóvgorod there were one or two churches to St. Elijah of the Drought, and St. Elijah of the Rain, to be consulted as occasion required. The name days of these saints are December 6th and July 20th. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Hawk</i>. The hawk is one of the most common references in Russian folk-lore, and the reference to the clear-eyed hawk is one of the strongest metaphors. The crow is equally common, but is generally used as a malign being. In Russian folk-tale there is nothing incongruous in a man having as his sons a boy, a crow and a hawk or an eagle: or as in 'Márya Morévna,' where the marriage of Ivan with a beautiful princess and of his two sisters with the eagle and the crow are all of them equally plausible. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Ídolishche.</i> One of the symbols of paganism in the early ballads of Russia. He is generally represented as a gluttonous monster; but in the ballad of the Realms of Copper, Silver, and Gold his name has been given too as a goblin. Goblins are very rare in Russian folk-lore; fairies seem to be non-existent. 
</p>
<div class="calibre3"></div>
<p class="calibre6"> <span><span id="calibre_link-584" data-page-number="340" data-page-name="Page:RussianFolkTales Afanasev 368pgs.djvu/356" data-page-index="356" data-page-quality="4" title="Page:RussianFolkTales_Afanasev_368pgs.djvu/356"></span></span>
<i class="calibre33"><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ilya_Muromets" title="w:Ilya Muromets">Ilyá Múromets</a>.</i> Ilyá  Múromets is one of the heroes of the Kíev cycle; he derives his strength from mystical sources of Mother Earth, and his great feat is the slaying of the Nightingale Robber. He is intermediate between the <span class="calibre35">'</span><i class="calibre33">elder bogatyri</i><span class="calibre35">'</span> the earth-born Tirans, and the human champions of the legendary Court of Vladímir. He is always of popular origin and, as such, at variance with the semi-Scandinavian Court. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
<i class="calibre33">Iván <span title="[sic] &apos;Vasilyevich&apos;" class="calibre42">Vasil'evich</span>.</i> The Tsar  Iván Vasil'evich is a very popular figure in the Russian ballads; there are two of this name: <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivan_III_of_Russia" title="w:Ivan III of Russia">Ivan III.</a> 1462-1505, and <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivan_the_Terrible" title="w:Ivan the Terrible">Ivan the Terrible</a>, 1533-1584. Both were very energetic rulers who enlarged the domain of Moscow and curbed the power of the territorial nobility. 
</p><p class="calibre6"><br class="calibre3" />
</p>
<div class="wst-center">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
